Everyone knows that Pani Puri vendors do not take care of hygiene, neither do they
wash their hands nor do they
use fresh ingredients, they
even put rotten potatoes and onions in the masala, it seems that there is
a golgappa vendor standing in your street,
in the middle of the day he got a nature's call, he went and
urinated, came back, did
not wash his hands and
started feeding golgappas to people with the same hands. Another dangerous case
happened in Warangal, Telangana in March 2024 when this video of an ice cream vendor
went viral
[Music] At
3:00 in the night, suddenly Ramashna and
Vijay started having stomach pain and vomiting,
first their parents took them to the local hospital
and then when they were
taking them to Yalluru Government Hospital from there,
both the children died on the way.
Stop living in this superstition that it is only one bite,
hey, what will happen with one bite,
brother, even one bite makes a difference,
but have you ever
noticed anything other than their faces and useless talk in these reels?
[Music]
Hardly anyone among us would have seen
this strange video  You must not have seen the clips,
brother, please, the
troubled police, the FCD people, are even greater than this,
why are you talking to us, don't stop
here, you are here, oh no, you have something even
greater than this, what and
the list is never ending, but have you
ever noticed anything else in these reels apart from their faces and useless
talks,
see how this girl
puts her finger in her mouth while making vada pav and then
starts making vada pav with the same finger,
see how the food that has fallen outside the utensil on the shelf is
collected and then taken inside and
mixed, take it brother,
Jai Bansi waale, see how this pani
puri wala is mixing the masala and water with absolutely clean hands,
see how this
guy is saving water while making chole, that's
right, when you can wash your hands in the vegetable itself, then
why waste water separately,
see how this guy is washing the utensil with this dirty water
and in this last clip, it has crossed all
limits, this pani puri wala was making
people drink golgappa by putting his urine in its water, thankfully, today this  Banda
Jail Mein Hai In short we can clearly see what is the
condition of fast food stalls in India and
how unhygienic is the food available from them,
so in today's 3D animated video we will
understand step by step that
how can you save yourself from the street foods that are causing people's death
and what are these street food vendors adding in these food items
that people's
addiction towards these street foods is increasing
but like every time, let's
start from the beginning, look junk food, fast food and
street food are all three different things. Junk
food means food with zero nutritional value
like that which contains salt, fat or sugar etc.
in high quantity. Fast food means any
food that can be prepared and served quickly. It is
not necessary that all fast
foods are unhealthy, some are healthy too
like salad, hummus, extra and the
basic meaning of street food is just this much that the
food that is available on the streets can be unhealthy as
well as healthy but
In our country, 90% of the cases are unhealthy.
Further in this video, we will talk about junk food
or you can say we will expose the unhealthy
street foods and will
keep an eye on those exact chemicals and ingredients because of which
people are not able to control themselves even after knowing that
junk food is extremely dangerous for us.
60 crore people fall sick every year and
4,20,000 people die every year according to a WHO
report. And look carefully at the
reason given in this report. Due to
eating contaminated and unsafe food. To
understand this thing more, BBC did
an interesting scientific study in which
twin sisters Amy and Nasee were
asked to follow a special diet routine.
This experiment was to know that
if one person eats only junk food and unhealthy
street food and the other only healthy home-
made food, then what will be the effect on the body?
Even before the experiment started, the
BBC people had  It was also important
that the profile of both the candidates
be normal, so before following this routine,
some tests were done on these two sisters
like blood test, lipid
profile test and blood sugar test.
After the test, whatever was decided for the next 14 days
happened, that is, Amy
ate junk food or you can say ultra
processed food, that is, she ate a lot of
fried food and on the other hand Nasi
ate home-made food and only salad.
Finally 14 days have passed and now it is time to
check
what exactly difference this experiment made on Amy and Nasi. See,
Nasi's reports came out absolutely normal,
her blood fat level, lipid profile and
blood sugar, all things were within the standard values,
but on the other hand, Amy's
results were quite shocking, her blood fat
level, lipid profile and blood sugar level were
all found to be increased to a great extent and
obviously the weight and body fat had increased.
Now understand here also that this
trend of street food is not a latest trend.
Rather, the trend of bad street food
is the latest trend. In fact, street foods are a
gift from our ancestors.
Even in the olden days, street food stalls used to be set up
and what was available on them were
healthy things like roasted grains and nuts. Then the
wheel of time turned and gradually
new items started getting added to the category of these stalls.
Snacks like samosas, pakodas and chaat have always been
people's favorites and in this way
unhealthy items started getting
added to the category of street foods. The first
introduction of junk food happened in India during the British
rule when they introduced
snacks like sandwiches and pastries in clubs and canteens. In fact,
even after independence in 1947, western style fast food was
not so common. Our traditional street
foods dominated. Everyone liked Mumbai's vada
pav and Kolkata's kathi roll.
But after economic liberalization in 1990,
international fast food
started coming to India. McDonald's opened its first outlet in 1996
and according to Indian taste.
They adapted the menu and introduced
items like Macaloo Tikki and Maharaja Mac.
Then with time
in the 21st century as people became money minded and
street food became a
trend, street foods
and junk foods became a solid business model
and today the situation is such that anyone can
set up a cart, feed garbage to people and
earn money. Just last year,
during an investigation in Karnataka, it was found that what
a Pani Puri vendor was serving there was not
just Pani Puri but also your one
way ticket to hell because
cancer causing agents were found in most of the samples. Along
with this, cancer causing agents were also found
in Budhiya ke Baal Gobi Manchurian and Kabab sold in Karnataka,
due to which the artificial colours used in making them were
even banned.
Everyone knows that Pani Puri vendors do not take care of hygiene, neither do they wash their hands nor
use fresh ingredients, they
even put rotten potatoes and onions in the masala,
one such case  On 5th November, a case came to light in Bengaluru
in which a vendor was
arrested by the police. He was not only using dirty stuff but when
caught, he was
also lying that everything was clean. Now think,
if I tell you to
drink water from the washroom of your house or from a public washroom,
then obviously you cannot do that.
But if the same water is used by a Pani
Puri seller in his chutney and you
drink that water without thinking, then in the
case of Kolhapur in Maharashtra,
a vendor was bringing water from a Sulabh toilet
and was making Pani Puri with the same.
A street vendor selling Pani Puri in Kolhapur, Maharashtra was
caught red handed using toilet water.
This street vendor was using toilet water to make water for Pani Puri.
This came to light because of this video.
Otherwise, think about it. There are thousands of such
vendors who might be
using water from God knows where. Now it is a
big mistake to assume that only the
Pani Puri available at street stalls is
bad. Actually, some time ago
FSSAI had
collected 260 samples of Pani Puri from road side stalls as well as big restaurants in Karnataka
and artificial colours were being used in 41 of these samples.
Such
artificial colours were
increasing the chances of cancer. These are
not just investigative studies but have even led to
deaths in many real life cases. For example,
a case was seen in Dindigul, Tamil Nadu in June last year.
It was quite
shocking and disturbing news. A 17
year old boy died allegedly
after eating Pani Puri. The exact cause has
not been confirmed yet but such cases
mostly happen due to food poisoning or contaminated food.
It is true that we
all think that nothing like this can happen to us tomorrow
but the real thing is that there is no
guarantee of tomorrow. Who knew that
a boy from Tamil Nadu would
lose his life just by eating outside food. Imagine if
this happens to the main earning person of a family, then
his family would be devastated.  But what must they be going through
and how do they manage their children's education and household expenses?
In such bad times, only one thing comes to the rescue of that family and that is
insurance and in that too I would say that
you should take a term insurance because
it is the purest form of insurance in which you have to pay a
premium of 600-700
and you can get coverage up to 2 crores for your family
and its another
specialty is that the younger the age at which you take it, the
more your premium gets locked for life time
but if you
delay it, then the same coverage can cost you dearly next time. Apart from
this,
another emergency that comes in people's life anytime is a
medical emergency, which not only
affects your savings but
also weakens your family finances. In such a situation,
a health insurance can be very useful for you, which
nowadays is available in a small amount like 300-400
and it
can save you the cost of medical bills worth crores. So
both the preparations are necessary, both health
insurance and term insurance, which
company's plan will you take, it is up to you.
For your convenience, the link is
given in the description below. Check it. You will
find all the trusted insurance partners at
one place where you
can compare the best plans according to your needs
and you will
also get a discount of up to 15 to 25% on purchasing these plans online. So
hurry up and take both these
insurances right now and you can be completely relaxed
so that you
and your family are completely safe in any emergency.
If the water of Pani Puri is dirty or
contaminated like sewage water or
untreated water, then it
can also cause bacterial infections. If
rotten potatoes, bad masala or Puri is too
old, then toxic bacteria
can develop. If the vendor does not take care of the cleanliness of washing hands, then
infection can also spread through his hands. Many times bacteria like E. coli, cell
manella or cholera
enter our body from these contaminated food,
which can cause severe vomiting, dehydration
and even organ failure. More
over, K Rajendra in Madras High Court in Chennai
A PIL was filed
stating that Maida is
bleached with benzoic peroxide or chlorine oxide
and not just bleaching but
a chemical alloxan is also added to make Maida soft.
Due to this, Maida contains
multiple chemical components which
can be harmful for health.
Following this PIL, Madras High Court
ordered FSSAI to
do a proper investigation of this matter and if this
claim turns out to be true, take immediate action. Now this
alloxan is a chemical that can disrupt
insulin production by damaging the beta cells of the pancreas.
These beta
cells make insulin in our body.
Yes, the same insulin that regulates glucose levels.
Now think, when these
beta cells are not able to do their work properly, then
less insulin will be produced in the body
due to which your risk of getting diabetes will
increase. It has also been seen in animal studies
that alloxan can cause diabetes.
Due to this, concern is being raised that this
junk may also be dangerous for people's health.  Food items like momos, bread, extra flour is
used in abundance but
one such thing without which even this junk food
tastes bland is mayonnaise. First of all,
watch this video to see
how much oil is being added to make mayonnaise. In
fact, mayonnaise contains 80% oil,
so it is counted among the most unhealthy foods.
Just one
tablespoon of mayonnaise contains more than 100
calories and people generally
use it in large quantities, which can become a major cause of weight gain. The
mayonnaise available in the market contains preservatives,
artificial flavors and stabilizers
which cause digestive issues and affect gut health.
Another problem is
that the oils used in mayonnaise contain
omega six fatty acids
in very high quantities, which increases the
risk of chronic diseases by increasing inflammation in the body.
Last year in June 2024,
a doctor living in Mumbai criticized the
company Yamo.  Butterscotch ice cream cone was
ordered online. While eating the ice cream, the doctor
felt a big piece in his mouth. At
first, he thought that it might be a big nut like
a dry fruit etc. but when he took it
out of his mouth, it turned out to be a piece of flesh
which also had nails. Another
dangerous case happened in Warangal, Telangana in March 2024
when this video of an ice cream vendor went
viral.
In this video, it is clearly visible that this man was
mixing semen in the ice cream after masturbating. The local people recorded this act
in the video and as soon as the
video went viral on social media, the police
took immediate action. The police
arrested the vendor and also seized his ice cream card. A
case has also been registered against the vendor under obscene act in a public place.
Well, now if you
eat Pani Puri from an unhygienic cart, then
in such a real life scale, you will
not see anything wrong at the microbiological level, but the eyes
open when scientists collect samples from these carts
and then
study them. One such very
interesting study  This was done by the Institute of
Hotel Management Catering and Nutrition,
Pusa. To collect the samples, they
chose five such locations in West Delhi where there were maximum sales.
They had also chosen posh areas
like Connaught Place and Rajouri Garden.
In all these areas, they visited samosa, golgappas, burger
and momos shops
twice a month at long intervals and collected
samples. Shockingly, when these
samples were tested, the scientists found
such things that they had
not even imagined in their dreams. One more thing,
before I tell you the result of the samples, pause this video
once and go and eat golgappas
because it is possible that after that you may
never eat golgappas in your life. So, the
result of the samples was that the scientists found four
such bacterial pathogens which they had
not expected at all - Bacillus cereus,
Clostridium perfringens, Staphylococcus
aureus, Salmonella species, all these
bacterial  Pathogens attack vomiting, diarrhea,
typhoid, food poisoning as extra and bonus
but the matter of concern for the
scientist was not as much as what
could be the source of these bacterial pathogens and E. coli mixed with them or let's say
how it came in the water of this golgappa. So as a
conclusion of this study, Dr. Arpita
Sharma told that
if the coliform test of the golgappa water is coming positive, then
it is a direct indication that there is
fecal contamination or fecal matter in that water.
If I say in simple language,
some amount of excreta is present in that golgappa water.
Practically how is this happening in real life, it is like this that
a golgappa wala is standing in your street,
in the middle of the day he got a nature call, he went and
urinated and came back, he did not wash his hands
and started feeding golgappa to people with the same hands
and people want such fecal matter
contaminated water as extra.  The
water of golgappas contains so many
harmful bacteria,
one of these bacteria is Vibrio
cholerae. In normal cases, this bacterium
along with others goes into your stomach and the
HCL acid present in your stomach
kills such bacteria, but when you
drink contaminated golgappas water repeatedly, the amount of bacteria entering
your stomach increases, due to which some
bacteria survive and enter the small intestine and
multiply and make you sick.
Something similar happened on January 24 this year in
Yeluru district of Andhra Pradesh,
where two boys
died after eating dirty water of pani puri from a roadside stall.
Actually, Ramakrishna, who was 10 years old,
and Vijay, who was 6 years old,
went out of the house with their parents at 7:30 in the evening.
They ate pani puri. Their parents
also consumed street food from somewhere. Then at
night, they went back to their house and slept. In
the middle of the night, at 3:00 am, suddenly Ramakrishna and
Vijay started having stomach ache and fever.  Vomiting started.
First their parents took them to the local hospital
and then while
taking them to Yeluru Government Hospital,
both the children died on the way.
Now we have understood that people are
dying due to junk food sold on the streets and
people are falling sick, but we do
n't understand why the world is not stopping despite knowing all this. There must be
some science behind this, right? Yes, there is science and that is the
umami taste. Look, this is your tongue.
Through this, we can identify different tastes
like sweet, sour, salty, bitter and
umami meaning umami is the fifth basic taste of the
human tongue. The main component of umami taste is
glutamic acid.
Glutamic acid is an amino acid which is
naturally found in many foods like
tomatoes, mushrooms etc. When this glutamic
acid comes in contact with our taste buds,
it activates the umami receptors.
This activation
releases dopamine in the brain, which
sends signals of pleasure and cravings.
In street food, spices, fermented sauces and slow
cooking methods are used which
enhance the umami taste. Fried foods
and smoky dishes also activate the umami receptors
which further excite the taste buds.
Now if sodium is added to this glutamic acid, the
product
formed is MSG i.e. monosodium
glutamate because it dissolves easily
and makes the umami taste stronger.
That is why it is artificially
added to foods. MSG is added to artificially
processed foods like instant noodles, chips,
frozen food, processed snacks and Chinese
food. Now the problem arises
when MSG is consumed in excessive amounts
because it can also trigger MSG symptom complex like overeating, weight gain and
health issues.
If
someone consumes too much MSG at one time, then the
nervous system of his body can become
overactivated which can cause
symptoms like headache, fatigue, dizziness, tingling sensation in the body  Therefore,
it is also said
that by chance, if you are
eating chips, Kurkure etc. at home, then never
share it with small children because
this junk food directly impacts the nervous system
and the nervous system of those children is
just in the developing phase. It was
because of this MSG that in the year 2015,
National India got stuck in a big crisis
when in the test of Uttar Pradesh Food Safety and
Drug Administration (UPFDA),
excess lead and MSG was found in Maggi noodles.
In the test of FSSAI,
three major problems were found in Maggi instant noodles with taste maker.
First was high lead
content, the amount of lead in Maggi was
found to be more than the allowed limit of 2.5 ppm. Second was
misleading labeling,
No added MSG was written on the packet of Maggi, which turned out to be wrong and
third was unauthorized product, Maggi Oats
Masala Noodles was launched in the market without proper approval. The
controversy grew so much that all the
variants of Maggi were taken out of the market.  A recall order was
given and the
production, sale and distribution of Maggi was
stopped for 5 months across India. Again
in the year 2021, another controversy happened in
which due to the leak of an internal report,
it came to light that more than 60% of Nestle's
food products do
not match the recognized standards of health.
FSSAI's food
safety rules are not that strict in India,
due to which companies use more palm oil and
hydrogenated oils. On top of this,
people also prefer cheap and tasty food,
which gives companies an opportunity to use even more cheap and
unhealthy ingredients.
If you look at the packet of any salty chocolate or
processed food, you will find
palm oil in most places. This is
not limited to big brands like Nestle, Pepsio or ITC but is a
common practice in the entire food industry. Cheap
and lower quality ingredients are
used in developing countries like India and the same products are used
in developed nations like Europe, US and Australia.  They are sold
with better ingredients and healthier oils.
If you have ever gone to
eat samosas or pakoras at a roadside stall, make a small
observation about the colour of the oil.
In most cases, it will be black or dirty
brown. This is because it is reused
oil that contains
dangerously high amounts of trans fats. And the oil is also the
same palm oil or hydrogenated oil
that is cheap and a slow poison for health.
Understand this well that the
biggest enemy of the heart is trans fat, which is
artificially produced and is
used by food companies to reduce costs and increase shelf life. It is
cheaper than animal fats like butter.
Every year, more than 5 lakh deaths occur worldwide
due to excessive intake of trans fat.
Trans fats increase LDL, i.e., bad
cholesterol and reduce HDL, i.e.,
good cholesterol. This
ultimately increases the risk of arteries getting blocked.
Its direct impact increases the
chances of heart attack and stroke.
A survey revealed that
25% of street food snacks in Delhi and Haryana had
high levels of trans fat.
Not just this, fake paneer and adulterated paneer is being
sold openly in many places in our country,
which can be very
harmful for health. Now look at this video
carefully. This guy is putting 200 grams of paneer
in bread pakoras and on top of that, he is giving so many other
things and the price is only 50.
Brother, how is this possible? You can go and
check anywhere. In the market, 200 grams of Amul paneer
costs 90 and Saras paneer costs 77.
Then, from which factory is the paneer that this guy is using
coming from? Just a while
ago, a
factory making adulterated paneer was also seized in Jaipur.
You must have understood that fake
paneer is being made to earn more profit and reduce costs.
Such cases
keep coming up every day. First of all,
synthetic milk is prepared in place of real milk.
In which detergent powder, shampoo, refined oil
and starch are added so that the milk looks thick
and creamy. Then
citric acid or cheap vinegar is
used to break this fake milk so that a solid texture like paneer is
obtained. This mixture is frozen and
pressed so that a tight and
compact shape is obtained.
Starch and synthetic chemicals are added to increase the weight
and sometimes urea, washing powder
and formalin are also used.
Formalin, yes, this is the same chemical which is
used to preserve dead bodies
and some people use it to make fruits, vegetables and milk
look more fresh.
This is very harmful because it can be
carcinogenic i.e. it can cause cancer.
All this is done so
that the paneer does not spoil for a long time. To
test fake paneer, you
can apply a simple method. If the paneer
becomes sticky or hard after putting it in boiling water, then
it may be fake.
Put iodine on the paneer and see if the color turns blue or
black.  That is fake. Now look at this
website, Hyperpure, it is Zomato's B2B
platform through which Zomato
delivers fresh, high-quality ingredients and kitchen supplies to restaurants and food businesses. It provides food materials in bulk,
which
includes vegetables, dairy, meat, oils and packaged goods. Just last year,
in October 2014, people
started criticizing Zomato because it was
selling analog paneer to restaurants through Hyperpure. Analog paneer is a
non-dairy substitute
made from vegetable oils, starch and milk solids.
Its taste and texture are
designed to look similar to real paneer,
but it is cheaper and has a longer shelf
life. That's why some restaurants
and food chains prefer it. Although
fake paneer is more toxic,
analog paneer is also a low-nutrition
substitute that is used in place of real paneer
and both are not healthy.
Think about red chilli powder, which is
an important ingredient in every Indian kitchen.  The ingredients have
also been adulterated many times.
Salt, talc powder, soap stone and
artificial colours were already being added to it.
Now, going a step further, brick powder has
also started being added.
This Matnil Yellow is used in place of turmeric powder.
Apart from this, artificial colours like Tata Sunset Yellow,
Indigo Carmine Extra are
also added to Indian food items
just to make their visual appearance attractive.
Azodaise, which is
banned in developed countries, is being used as a
food ingredient in India without any restriction. It
means that there is really a great
need for FSSAI to
apply more strict regulations.
According to a study by Lucknow-based Indian Institute of Toxicology Research,
banned dyes like Orange to Oramine are
also being used indiscriminately in the sweets available in India. In the
list that you are seeing on the screen right now,
you can clearly see in which
food items this is present.  Harmful
artificial colours are being added. These
fake colours are having a direct impact
on the kidneys, liver, spleen, testicles and ovaries,
which can cause serious health issues in the long term.
Their effect is visible in children as well, leading to
problems like behavioural changes and hyperactivity. The
Karnataka government has even
banned artificial food colours
and food vendors who violate this rule can be punished with up
to 7 years in jail and a
fine of up to 1 lakh. If you think
street food is a minor hygiene
problem, then this video is a wake-up call.
Whatever we have just seen - dirty water, fake
ingredients, harmful chemicals and
real cases of food poisoning - are all part of a larger
health crisis. Can
eating just one golgappa or one vada pav be
so harmful that it can take a person
's life? Absolutely and not just one, but
every year lakhs of people are falling sick because of this thing.  The
shocking thing is that
people know that street food can be unsafe,
yet they are eating it relentlessly.
Because it has become like an addiction to that
oh-so-taste and those cheap prices. This is the
reason that whether toilet water is being used
or fake paneer is being used, still people are
continuously eating it.
Giving up street food is not the solution. Eating very little street
food is the solution. If you are
eating 80% of your life for health, then 20%
if you are eating for the soul, it is also fine.
But you just have to keep these special things in mind. Do
n't do anything stupid. Choose street food wisely. Do
n't take food from a vendor whose hygiene is zero. See if he washes his hands or not. If he
covers the food properly or not. If he does
n't, then avoid it. Learn about fake and adulterated
food. It is important to learn how to test fake paneer, synthetic
flour and adult-rated spices.
Test the paneer with iodine. If it turns blue, then it is fake. If the
samosa or pakora looks awesome,  If it is
there, then there must be some chemical or low grade oil inside it. If you see that any vendor is using dirty water or adulterating it, then report it. Go to FSSAI and local authorities' complaint portals and raise the issues. If we become subconscious and aware, then the
street food culture in India will also improve.
Think about it. One action of ours
can save someone's life tomorrow. Stop living in this superstition
that it is just one bite.
What can one bite do? Brother, even one bite makes a
difference. That's it for today. Don't
forget to take health insurance and term insurance from Policy Bazaar. I have
given the link in the description. Well,
in this video, I have explained how you people are being fooled by making a
useless comparison of Sattu vs Whey Protein.